# Melanoma Skin Cancer Detection
## Abstract
In cancer, there are over 200 different forms. Out of 200, melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer. The diagnostic procedure for melanoma starts with clinical screening, followed by dermoscopic analysis and histopathological examination. Melanoma skin cancer is highly curable if it gets identified at the early stages. The first step of Melanoma skin cancer diagnosis is to conduct a visual examination of the skin's affected area. Dermatologists take the dermatoscopic images of the skin lesions by the high-speed camera, which have an accuracy of 65-80% in the melanoma diagnosis without any additional technical support. With further visual examination by cancer treatment specialists and dermatoscopic images, the overall prediction rate of melanoma diagnosis raised to 75-84% accuracy. The project aims to build an automated classification system based on image processing techniques to classify skin cancer using skin lesions images.

## Problem Statement
To build a CNN based model which can accurately detect melanoma. Melanoma is a type of cancer that can be deadly if not detected early. It accounts for 75% of skin cancer deaths. A solution that can evaluate images and alert dermatologists about the presence of melanoma has the potential to reduce a lot of manual effort needed in diagnosis.


## Table of Contents
* [General Info](#general-information)
* [Technologies Used](#technologies-used)
* [Conclusions](#conclusions)
* [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)

## Motivation
The overarching goal is to support the efforts to reduce the death caused by skin cancer. The primary motivation that drives the project is to use the advanced image classification technology for the well-being of the people. Computer vision has made good progress in machine learning and deep learning that are scalable across domains.

## Dataset
The dataset consists of 2357 images of malignant and benign oncological diseases, which were formed from the International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC). All images were sorted according to the classification taken with ISIC, and all subsets were divided into the same number of images.

The data set contains the following diseases:
0	actinic keratosis	        114
1	basal cell carcinoma	    376
2	dermatofibroma	             95
3	melanoma	                438
4	nevus	                    357
5	pigmented benign keratosis	462
6	seborrheic keratosis	     77
7	squamous cell carcinoma	    181
8	vascular lesion	            139


To overcome the issue of class imbalance, used a python package  Augmentor (https://augmentor.readthedocs.io/en/master/) to add more samples across all classes so that none of the classes have very few samples.


## General Information
- The overarching goal is to support the efforts to reduce the death caused by skin cancer. The primary motivation that drives the project is to use the advanced image classification technology for the well-being of the people. Computer vision has made good progress in machine learning and deep learning that are scalable across domains.
- The background of this project is to build a multiclass classification model using a custom convolutional neural network in TensorFlow to identify the Melanoma Skin Cancer Detection.
- The solution that can evaluate images and alert dermatologists about the presence of melanoma has the potential to reduce a lot of manual effort needed in diagnosis.
- The dataset consists of 2357 images of malignant and benign oncological diseases, which were formed from the International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC). All images were sorted according to the classification taken with ISIC, and all subsets were divided into the same number of images.

## Technologies Used
- tensorflow
- matplotlib
- keras
- pandas
- numpy
- Seaborn
- Augmentor

***CNN Architecture Design ***
To achieve higher accuracy and results on the classification task, we have built custom CNN model.

- Rescalling Layer - To rescale an input in the [0, 255] range to be in the [0, 1] range to normalize the image.
- Convolutional Layer - Convolutional layers apply a convolution operation to the input, passing the result to the next layer. A convolution converts all the pixels in its receptive field into a single value. For example, if you would apply a convolution to an image, you will be decreasing the image size as well as bringing all the information in the field together into a single pixel. 
- Pooling Layer - Pooling layers are used to reduce the dimensions of the feature maps. Thus, it reduces the number of parameters to learn and the amount of computation performed in the network. The pooling layer summarises the features present in a region of the feature map generated by a convolution layer.
- Dropout Layer - The Dropout layer randomly sets input units to 0 with a frequency of rate at each step during training time, which helps prevent overfitting.
- Flatten Layer - Flattening is converting the data into a 1-dimensional array for inputting it to the next layer. We flatten the output of the convolutional layers to create a single long feature vector. And it is connected to the final classification model, which is called a fully-connected layer.
- Dense Layer - The dense layer is a neural network layer that is connected deeply, which means each neuron in the dense layer receives input from all neurons of its previous layer.
- Activation Function(ReLU) - The rectified linear activation function or ReLU for short is a piecewise linear function that will output the input directly if it is positive, otherwise, it will output zero.The rectified linear activation function overcomes the vanishing gradient problem, allowing models to learn faster and perform better.
- Activation Function(Softmax) - The softmax function is used as the activation function in the output layer of neural network models that predict a multinomial probability distribution. The main advantage of using Softmax is the output probabilities range. The range will 0 to 1, and the sum of all the probabilities will be equal to one.

## Conclusions
- First of-all build the base model and the model is not generalised as the training accuracy is very high
- Added Dropout layer and We can able to see there is not much improvement in accuracy but we can definitely see the overfitting problem has solved due to data Dropout & augmentation and Training Accuracy vs Validation Loss follow the same direction and there is not much gap between.
- Fianlly used Augmentor package to solve class imbalance issue, and build more deep NN and model is able to perform very well with unseen data and the accuracy is 85%.


## Acknowledgements
- Melanoma Skin Cancer from https://www.cancer.org/cancer/melanoma-skin-cancer/about/what-is-melanoma.html
- Efficient way to build CNN architecture from https://towardsdatascience.com/a-guide-to-an-efficient-way-to-build-neural-network-architectures-part-ii-hyper-parameter-42efca01e5d7
